.TH KASM 1 "June 2026" "KASM 2.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
kasm \- tiny Linux x86-64 assembler with transparent output modes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B kasm
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIinput.asm\fR
.PP
.B kasm build
[\fB--config\fR \fIFILE\fR] [\fB--verbose\fR] [\fB--no-link\fR]
.PP
.B kasm link
\fIfile.o ...\fR \fB-o\fR \fIapp\fR [\fB--entry\fR \fISYMBOL\fR]
.PP
.B kasm inspect
\fIfile.o\fR [\fB--symbols\fR] [\fB--sections\fR] [\fB--relocs\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
KASM is a small C11 assembler for Linux x86-64 with Intel-like syntax. It focuses on direct ELF64 output, no-libc programs, binary layout work, and educational byte-level transparency through explain, map, and listing modes.
.PP
KASM is intentionally not a complete NASM replacement.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Output
.TP
.B \-o FILE
Write output to FILE.
.TP
.B \-f FORMAT
Select output format. Supported values are elf64, elf64-obj, obj, and bin. The default is elf64.
.TP
.B --combine
Recognized but not implemented yet. Multiple inputs currently assemble independently to .o files and should be linked with ld.
.TP
.B --tiny, -Oz
Prefer smaller safe encodings and compact direct ELF layout.
.TP
.B --tiny-report
Enable tiny mode and print jump, immediate, savings, and final-size statistics.
.SS Project Build
.TP
.B build
Build the project described by kasm.toml in the current directory.
.TP
.B build --config FILE
Use a specific project configuration file.
.TP
.B build --verbose
Print every assemble step and the exact linker command.
.TP
.B build --no-link
Assemble project object files but skip the final linker invocation.
.TP
.B build --dump-symbols, build --dump-sections, build --dump-relocs, build --dump-all
Print per-source project build dumps while assembling.
.TP
.B build --internal-linker, build --linker internal
Link executable projects with KASM's built-in ELF64 linker instead of external ld.
.SS Link
.TP
.B link file.o... -o app
Link ELF64 relocatable object files into a static Linux x86-64 executable with the built-in linker.
.TP
.B link --entry SYMBOL
Use SYMBOL as the executable entry point. The default is _start.
.SS Include/Preprocessor
.TP
.B \-I PATH
Add an include search path.
.TP
.B --print-include-paths
Print active include search paths and exit.
.TP
.B --print-std-path
Print KASM standard include roots and exit.
.TP
.B --no-stdlib
Disable bundled and installed stdlib include paths.
.TP
.B --no-std
Alias for --no-stdlib.
.SS Syscalls
.TP
.B --no-syscall-sugar
Reject named syscall pseudo-instructions such as syscall write, STDOUT, msg, len. Plain raw syscall with no operands remains supported.
.SS Explain/List/Map
.TP
.B --explain
Print byte listing and encoding explanations.
.TP
.B --explain=normal
Print normal explain output.
.TP
.B --explain=verbose
Print verbose byte-level explain output with REX/opcode/ModRM/SIB details where available.
.TP
.B --explain=deluxe
Print structured encoding explanations with source location, normalized form, virtual address, length, prefixes, opcode, ModRM/SIB, displacement, immediate, relocation, and notes.
.TP
.B --explain-format text
Select text explain output. Text is the only supported explain format.
.TP
.B --explain-file FILE
Write explain output to FILE.
.TP
.B --elf-info
Print a generated ELF64 anatomy summary with header, program headers, sections, symbols, relocations, and entry point explanation.
.TP
.B --teach
Print a guided assembly, syscall ABI, encoding, and ELF walkthrough.
.TP
.B --teach-level LEVEL
Select teaching detail level. LEVEL may be beginner, intermediate, or deep.
.TP
.B --map FILE
Write a map file with sections, symbols, relocations, and structs.
.TP
.B --list FILE
Write a compact listing file.
.SS Hints
.TP
.B --hints
Print non-fatal educational performance and ABI hints.
.TP
.B --hints=LIST
Enable selected hint categories. LIST is comma-separated and may contain perf, abi, size, or all.
.TP
.B --hints-cpu CPU
Select hint CPU profile: generic, intel, amd, zen4, or skylake.
.SS Debug/Dump
.TP
.B --dump-symbols
Print parsed symbols.
.TP
.B --dump-sections
Print section sizes and flags.
.TP
.B --dump-ir
Print parsed intermediate statements.
.TP
.B --dump-relocs
Print relocation entries.
.TP
.B --dump-all
Print symbols, sections, and relocations in one stable report.
.TP
.B --dump-structs
Print struct layouts.
.TP
.B --dump-expanded
Print source after includes and macro expansion.
.TP
.B --dump-tokens
Print expanded source lines for token debugging.
.SS General
.TP
.B --help
Show help.
.TP
.B --version
Show version.
.SH OUTPUT FORMATS
.TP
.B elf64
Direct Linux x86-64 executable. Requires an entry symbol and cannot resolve externals.
.TP
.B elf64-obj
ELF64 relocatable object.
.TP
.B obj
Alias for elf64-obj.
.TP
.B bin
Raw section bytes in .text, .rodata, .data order.
.SH SYNTAX OVERVIEW
KASM supports semicolon comments, section declarations, labels, entry, global, extern, constants, simple expressions, data directives, memory operands, size specifiers, includes, defines, macros, macro-local labels, structs, sizeof, offsetof, syscall sugar, and stdlib includes.
.PP
See docs/SYNTAX.md, docs/INSTRUCTIONS.md, docs/SYSCALL_SUGAR.md, and docs/ELF_SURGEON_MODE.md for syntax, instruction subset, syscall sugar, and ELF anatomy output.
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX
kasm examples/01_hello_raw_syscall.asm -o hello
./hello

kasm examples/07_object_ld.asm -f obj -o object.o
ld object.o -o object

kasm main.asm util.asm syscalls.asm
ld main.o util.o syscalls.o -o app

kasm build --config examples/project_hello/kasm.toml --verbose

kasm link main.o util.o -o app

kasm inspect object.o --symbols

kasm examples/09_struct_binary_header.asm -f bin -o header.bin

kasm examples/10_explain_demo.asm -o demo --explain=deluxe --map demo.map --list demo.lst

kasm --elf-info examples/hello.asm -o hello

kasm --teach examples/teach_hello.asm -o teach_hello

kasm --tiny --tiny-report examples/tiny_exit.asm -o tiny_exit

kasm examples/hints.asm -o hints --hints

kasm examples/syscall_sugar_hello.asm -o sugar && ./sugar
.EE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/local/share/kasm/lib
Default installed stdlib include tree.
.TP
.I lib/kasm
Development stdlib include tree.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B KASM_INCLUDE_PATH
Colon-separated include search paths. These are searched after \-I paths and before bundled or installed stdlib paths.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Assembly or source error.
.TP
.B 2
CLI usage error.
.TP
.B 3
File/system error, reserved for future finer-grained handling.
.SH LIMITATIONS
KASM is Linux x86-64 only. It has a limited instruction subset, limited relocation types, no dynamic linker generation for direct executable mode, no debug info/DWARF, no full expression language, no full C preprocessor, and no libc. The inline stdlib is macro/include-based and does not handle syscall errors automatically.
.SH PROJECT
KASM is a focused educational assembler for small binaries and byte-level transparency.
